✰Title: "Chip War: The Fight for the World's Most Critical Technology"
✰Author: Chris Miller, Associate Professor of International History at Tufts University.
✰Publication Date: October 4, 2022
✰Core Theme: The Second World War was fought over steel and aluminum, the Cold War was driven by atomic bombs, and the current competition between China and the US is about computing power, most directly about chips.

✰Ten Questions about the Chip War✰
Q1. Why can't China independently control the research and development of chips?
A: Neither can the United States. The world's most advanced chips are produced by Taiwan's TSMC. The design software is from the United States; the ARM architecture used to design chips is from a British company acquired by Japan; the raw materials needed to produce chips can only be imported from Japan; the lithography machines necessary for chip production are owned by only five companies worldwide, including a Japanese company, three American companies, and the Dutch company ASML; packaging and testing are completed in Southeast Asia, and installation is done in China.
The key nodes of chip research and development are controlled by these companies.

Q2. How did the United States initially develop its chip industry?
A: First, technology preceded market demand. There were breakthroughs in semiconductor physics before there was a subsequent application market.
Second, the support of the U.S. military was crucial, but it was not all-encompassing. Whether it was the Apollo moon landing program, later missile orders, or the invention of lithography technology by the military's own labs, the U.S. military had a huge role in promoting the chip industry.
Third, the story is full of surprises. Every hero who did the most critical things right could make some mistakes later... The era you created could leave you behind.
Fourth, the entrepreneurial environment in the United States is very free. Your company may be pretty good, but as long as I have a better idea, I dare to start my own company. And experience has proven that this approach often leads to a new round of innovation.
This is not a top-down planned project, nor is it based on good policies from the two parties in the United States. This is not the success of the "national system."

Q3. How did other countries and regions initially develop their own chip industries?
A: We can summarize the development of other countries and regions as the Soviet model, the Japanese model, and the Southeast Asian model.
The Soviet model: imitation. The United States achieved mass production of integrated circuits with lithography in 1958, and the Soviet Union, relying on industrial espionage techniques, succeeded in imitation by 1962. They built a semiconductor city and made a 1:1 copy of American chips.
The Japanese model: symbiosis. The United States produced the most advanced chips, and Japan produced slightly less advanced chips; the United States had a strong military market, and Japan was good at consumer electronics. The symbiotic strategy was very successful. Japan's economy grew rapidly, and the industries of the two countries were tied together.
The Southeast Asian model: contracting. American chip factories provided a pretty good job for workers and incoming farmers, stabilizing the people's hearts. Southeast Asia thus joined the American industrial ecosystem, being tied to the United States, which is equivalent to gaining geopolitical security.
It's much easier to develop by depending on each other than to fight alone. Whether it's Japan, Southeast Asia and the United States, or the U.S. military and the chip industry, they have all developed together because of mutual dependence.

Q4. What lessons can the chip competition between Japan and the United States in the 1980s bring to the chip competition between China and the United States?
A: There are three lessons that are worth our attention now.
First, the Asian model, which is a growth mode of government-led, investment-driven, and hard work in one direction, is not sustainable.
Second, there is not much future in competing with others in old fields for low-cost and good-quality products. Development ultimately relies on innovation, and innovation can be hard technology or application like Sony.
Third, innovation does indeed require government support, but the principle of government support must be to release the old and bring in the new, rather than protect backward production capacity: to support new companies with innovative ideas and the latest technology, not to save the failing old companies.

Q5. Why did Intel, which initially pushed for the development of lithography machines, give up the first-hand advantage of extreme ultraviolet lithography technology?
A: The lithography machine is the most complex machine in human history. The development of lithography machines is an absolutely international project. Producing high-end chips is a business that involves tremendous investment, huge risks, and a lot of trouble.
And Intel was already in control of the present. Andy Grove had sorted out Intel's business as early as the 1990s. All mainstream computers and servers use Intel CPUs. Intel alsoalso created a "moat", which was its X86 architecture. So for Intel, producing chips was like printing money. From the late 1980s to the present, Intel's total profits have been as high as 25 trillion dollars. It fell into the "Innovator's Dilemma".
Intel not only missed the first move in the extreme ultraviolet lithography business, missed the mobile chip market, but also missed the AI chip.

Q6. Why can Taiwan's TSMC produce the most advanced chips?
A: It's entirely because of one person, that's Morris Chang (Zhang Zhongmou). A series of strategies by Zhang Zhongmou ——
1. He initiated the "Gutenberg moment" of separating chip design and production;
2. Alliances with upstream and downstream partners such as ASML;
3. Determined investment at crucial moments to achieve technological upgrade;
4. He won the trust of the chip design circle with the principle of not competing with customers and became the leader in one fell swoop.
Zhang Zhongmou has always been loyal to his strategy. TSMC is powerful because it has a Zhang Zhongmou, not because it is the result of U.S. support. At most we can say that the U.S. *allowed* the development of TSMC.

Q7. What are China and the U.S. fighting for in the chip war, and how should we respond?
A: 1. China and the U.S. are fighting for "security" — to be more precise, for a "sense of security". The logic of both Chinese and U.S. militaries is offset strategy, the core of the offset strategy is AI, and the core of AI is chips.
2. China and the U.S. have not gone to war, both are very safe. But this paper calculation threatens the "sense of security" of both countries. The U.S. demands to maintain the leading position in chips, while China demands to gain autonomy over chips. This is the current situation.
3. Subsidies, market exchange technology, and acquisition of foreign chip companies are not real "independent innovation".
4. Government support, learning foreign advanced technology, and globalization are the "right way".

Q8. What is "neck strangle" exactly?
A: The focus of the U.S. crackdown on China is not just government subsidies, but the revelation given to Trump by the "Jinhua Infringement Case": he found that the sales ban really works.
Almost all chip design software is American. Some of the key components used by ASML, including the light source for lithography, are produced in the United States. The key tools and raw materials needed by Samsung and TSMC are controlled by the United States and Japan, and Japan is a U.S. ally. The U.S. doesn't need to directly engage in political hegemony, nor does it need to go through legal procedures, it just strangles China's neck from the logic of the chip industry chain.
The principle of neck strangle is called "weaponized interdependence" by American scholars. Because you can only rely on me for these key technologies, I can control you, I can use this dependence against you. In other words, the United States has weaponized the dependence of others on it.
No need for direct confrontation, no need for armed blockade. Kicking you out of the circle, not playing with you, is the biggest hit on you.

Q9. What is the current landscape of the chip industry?
A: At this moment, the chip industry has three characteristics:
1. It has only a few key nodes, most of which are controlled by the United States, which is most beneficial to the United States, but the United States cannot control everything.
2. It is closely related to the government and geopolitics.
3. It is fragile. The most advanced chips can only be produced by a few companies. If these companies have problems, it will be a problem for the entire industry and the related industries that use chips.

Q10. How to break the game in the chip war in China?
To break the game, there are "upper, middle, and lower" three strategies.
The lower strategy is to catch up comprehensively and try to achieve complete independence.
The middle strategy is not to pursue full control of the chip industry, but to seek to reduce dependence on the United States.
The upper strategy cannot be called "overtaking in a curve", perhaps it can be called "entering the circle in a curve".
Being "dependent upon" is the best treatment the world has to offer you today.

✰Chronology of the Chip War✰
✰In 1945, a physicist named William Shockley at Bell Labs accidentally discovered a "semiconductor", indicating that semiconductors could be made into "transistors". In 1948, Shockley turned the transistor into a "switch", meaning it could be used for the CPU of a computer.
✰In 1953, Sony's Akio Morita went to the United States and directly obtained the license to produce transistors.
✰In 1957, a young chemist from a U.S. military lab, Jay Lathrop, developed "lithography" technology.
✰In 1958, a young man from mainland China, who had attended Harvard and MIT, joined Texas Instruments. This young man's English name was Morris Chang, and his Chinese name was Zhang Zhongmou.
✰In 1968, Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore, who had defected from Fairchild, created their own company called Intel.
✰In 1970, Intel invented Dynamic Random Access Memory (DRAM), which is what we now call memory.
✰In 1977, Silicon Valley engineer William J. Perry became the U.S. Department of Defense Deputy Secretary for Research and Engineering. Perry formulated the "offset strategy," closely cooperated with Silicon Valley, and persisted to the end.
✰In the late 1970s, Zhang Zhongmou believed that a business should be created to help others produce chips. But Texas Instruments did not accept this risky idea.
✰In 1985, Zhang Zhongmou accepted an invitation to Taiwan to serve as the president of the Industrial Technology Research Institute, and then he founded a chip company called TSMC.
✰In the late 1980s, Japan not only surpassed the United States in chip production quantity, but also provided 70% of the world's lithography equipment.
✰In 1987, Andy Grove succeeded Noyce as CEO of Intel.
✰In 1989, Sony founder Akio Morita and Shintaro Ishihara jointly published a book called "Japan That Can Say No."
✰In 1990, Japan experienced a financial crisis, the bubble burst, and Tokyo property prices plummeted.
✰By 1993, the United States had regained the first place in semiconductor shipments.
✰In 1998, South Korea's memory output surpassed Japan's.
✰Around the year 2000, Zhang Rujing founded SMIC in Shanghai.
✰In 2006, people realized that the parallel processing capabilities of GPUs could be used to train AI models, and Nvidia focused on developing this market, and is now a heavyweight company.
✰In the late 2010s, after two or three decades, ASML finally made the extreme ultraviolet lithography machine. During the entire R&D process, Intel, Samsung, and TSMC all provided investment to ASML, with Intel investing the most, totaling several billion dollars.
✰In 2016, Andy Grove passed away. Intel handed over the first move in the extreme ultraviolet lithography business to others.
✰At the end of 2017, Micron sued UMC and Jinhua in a Chinese court for infringing its patents.
✰In 2018, SMIC ordered an extreme ultraviolet lithography machine worth $120 million from ASML.
✰In 2020, the U.S. Department of Commerce issued new regulations, not only banning the sale of directly manufactured products to Huawei, but also banning the sale of products manufactured using U.S. technology to Huawei. At the time, Huawei was TSMC's second largest customer, but TSMC also had to comply with the ban and no longer contract for Huawei.
✰In 2022, Apple plans to use NAND flash chips from Wuhan Yangtze Memory Technologies Co., Ltd. in the iPhone. This is the first time Apple has used Chinese chips. Yangtze Memory is China's hope.
✰In 2023, it is said that Wuhan Yangtze Memory Technologies Co., Ltd. is laying off workers intensively.