What is the speaker's opinion on acknowledging someone else while doing the thing?
What is the speaker's opinion on relying on machines to do work?
What does the speaker think about the possibility of manipulating gravity in our universe?
What are some of the challenges associated with proof of work mining?
What does the speaker hope for regarding the actions of leaders in response to COVID?
What is the topic of the text?
What is the speaker's opinion on the computational universe?
What does the author think about death?
What is the name of the person being interviewed in the text?
What is one of the things discussed in Deep Work that is important?
What is one thing we know for sure about the brain?
What did the speaker learn from watching a video on neural networks?
What was the original plan for the book mentioned in the text?
What did the speaker find out by looking at the data?
What kind of player is he?
What is the era that the speaker refers to as we are entering?
What approach did the author's team use for language understanding?
What is the benefit of automated mechanism design?
What is the block size debate about?
What does the speaker compare themselves to?
What is the bitter lesson according to the text?
What is the speaker trying to realize and live up to?
What is the speaker's personal experience with thinking?
What is the topic of the panel discussion that the speaker saw on YouTube?
What is the main tension that the speaker is discussing?
What was the speaker's initial reaction when they heard about the topic?
What is the speaker referring to when they mention 'the ledger'?
What is the trope mentioned in the text?
What is the most important step in starting a business according to the speaker?
What is the author analyzing in the given text?
What is the most challenging part of conducting experiments according to the text?
What was the challenge mentioned in the text?
What is the beauty of the concept being discussed?
What does the speaker think is more exciting in science?
What is the neocortex and how is it structured?
What is the name of the song the narrator was listening to?
What does the speaker say about making an individual part perfect?
What inspires people to come up with new technologies that make a difference?
What does the speaker think will happen if self-driving vehicles don't happen?
What does the speaker believe about intelligence?
What is the difference between science and commerce according to TK?
What does the speaker suggest is the reason for people's intrinsic goodness?
What is the author's opinion on having world wars?
What is the speaker's opinion on the evolution of the universe?
What does the speaker think about predicting with all the data around today?
What was one of the hardest things the speaker has ever done?
What is the author's opinion on the power of culture?
What is the topic of the podcast mentioned in the text?
What is the topic of the conversation?
What is the speaker's advice to the listener regarding their goal?
What is the author's opinion on SpaceX?
What is the speaker's opinion on predicting the future?
What is the range of expertise among the physicists and mathematicians mentioned in the text?
What does the speaker refer to as 'attachment' in Buddhism?
What is the topic of discussion in the given text?
What is the name of the finance app that presents the show?
What is the speaker's attitude towards partnering with others?
What is the speaker's opinion of the person who brought evil onto the world?
What is the basic task of humans according to the text?
What is the concept of ZK snarks?
What is the topic of discussion in the given text?
What event were the speaker and John doing together?
What is the topic of discussion in the given text?
What does the speaker think about the scenarios where robots are tethered to something that makes them our slaves?
What is the author discussing in this passage?
What is the speaker's opinion on the importance of an interactive component in teaching?
What is the analogy used to describe Bitcoin in the text?
What is the Patrushev project that is mentioned in the text?
What is the speaker's opinion on sex robots?
What is the human mind doing while a person is driving?
What is the speaker's opinion on the violence that occurred during wars in the past?
What advice does the speaker give to avoid boredom?
What is Novid and what kind of work have they been doing?
What did the speaker learn about during the conversation?
What is the theory being discussed in the text?
What question does the speaker ask the author?
What are some benefits of using a faster network?
What is the speaker's advice for finding self-love?
What is the West and how is it defined?
What is the middle camp's view on consciousness and information processing?
What happened to the virus over time?
What is Numba and why was it created?
What is the speaker's favorite set of games?
What is the ethical question posed by the author?
What topic is the speaker interested in after buying three books on boredom?
What does the speaker mean when they say they are 'playing up a side of yourself'?
What is the daily routine that the speaker follows?
What is the speaker's vision for using AI in language translation?
What is the author's opinion about the possibility of aliens existing?
What is the quote that the speaker keeps on their phone?
What is the question that the speaker asks the listener?
What is the remarkable achievement mentioned in the text?
What are the names of the sponsors mentioned in the podcast?
What is an example of an interaction where AI should not have a conversation with you?
What does first principles thinking require?
What is the author's opinion on the current understanding of the human body?
What is the author's opinion on the use of the terms 'machine learning' and 'deep learning'?
What is the magic of deep learning?
What does the speaker think about expertise?
What does the author think about the ability of a group to make ethical decisions?
What is the author describing in terms of their experience with the Olympic games?
What is the benefit of bypassing the image processor?
What is the comparison made between becoming a great comic and Jiu Jitsu?
What does the author believe about the idea that technology is values agnostic?
What is the speaker's motivation for working on AI?
What is the name of the book that the speaker mentions as one of their favorites?
Why is experiencing wins and losses important?
What is the potential danger of people who think it's the end times?
What does the speaker think about the idea of living forever?
What did the speaker learn from the person mentioned in the text?
What is the author's opinion on teaching math?
What is the topic of discussion in this text?
What is one of the things that is important to people on a day to day basis?
What is the speaker going to argue against?
What is the author's opinion on the importance of captivation?
What is the main concern regarding the use of data mentioned in the text?
What feature did they recently launch and why?
What is the neural network being compared to in this text?
What is the speaker's main concern when it comes to their job?
What is the initial focus of the project?
Who is the author dedicating their book to?
What is the poker community's opinion of the player being discussed?
What did the speaker switch to from experimental physics?
What does the author think it takes to make the world a better place?
What is the speaker's background in computer science?
What is the speaker's opinion about the person they are talking to?
What is the speaker's opinion on discovering joy?
What is the speaker's opinion on journals?
What is the speaker's opinion on making major irreversible life decisions?
What company is being discussed in the text?
What is the author's opinion on the current systems?
What is the author's opinion on the potential of Librex?
What did David give to the speaker when they visited his lab at MIT?
What is the bigger problem in capitalism according to the speaker?
What is the author suggesting we should do more of?
What was the mechanism that helped the speaker start listening to their body?
What is the phenomenon that the speaker is describing?
What was the conversation the speaker was calling for?
What did the speaker work on in the 1980s?
What is the brain doing when it makes predictions?
What is the speaker's concern regarding the current situation?
What are some ways to support the podcast mentioned in the text?
What is the speaker's opinion on the program's information?
What is the speaker's concern about the system?
What odds did the speaker put on P equaling NP?
What is the conversation the speaker had with Dan Carlin?
What does the speaker find fascinating?
What is the main difference between this game and chess or turn-based strategy games?
What is the speaker's theory related to quantum?
What is the breakthrough prize awarded for?
What is the significance of the people mentioned in the text?
What is the network sometimes called that represents the spread of a virus?
What is the example given in the text of a scientist who was trying to understand a complex problem for months?
What does the speaker mean when they say 'putting a new cartridge in your brain'?
What is quantum field theory?
What areas of research require massive funding according to the text?
What is becoming more common these days when a person passes away?
What is the suggested method for efficiently transmitting information across the network?
What did the woman ask the author when she expressed interest in his book?
What is the system that the speaker is referring to and how has it been trained?
What analogy does the speaker use to describe the process of consciousness being generated?
What is the speaker's opinion on using only neural networks for problem-solving?
What is the 'alignment problem' referred to in the text?
What is one of the things that is important to people on a day to day basis?
What is the text discussing?
What did Trump tap into according to the text?
What is the message that people have been hearing over and over throughout human history?
What is the David Goggins model?
What is neuromorphic computing?
What are some of the books mentioned in the text?
What are the problems that you have to attack?
What is an example of a problem in NP?
What is the joke that the speaker and their friend share?
What are the two psychological reasons mentioned by the speaker?
What is the name of the podcast mentioned in the text?
What does the speaker love about disagreements?
What is the author's question regarding the vaccine and their mind?
What is the speaker's experience with sauna?
What is the author disappointed by in the community?
What is the concept described in the text?
What is the paradigm that was tested in a very interesting way?
What is the speaker's opinion on the possibility of aliens showing up?
What is the task that may not seem trivial?
What is the speaker's opinion about the task at hand?
What are some advantages of using Ethereum instead of Bitcoin?
What is the author questioning the possibility of?
What is the speaker's opinion on the interaction between machines and humans?
What is the speaker pondering about in regards to a petabyte of memory?
What does the speaker believe is necessary for longterm growth?
What is the importance of consciousness according to the text?
What is the trade off being discussed in this text?
What is the dilemma that the speaker is referring to?
What is the purpose of the dojo system?
What is the analogy used to describe emergent patterns?
What is the music video that the speaker mentions in the text?
What advice does the speaker ask for from the person being addressed?
What is the challenge mentioned in the text?
What is the author's opinion on the concept of life being short?
What did the speaker learn from the language they were using?
What is the set theoretic hierarchy?
What is the big discovery of the principle mentioned in the text?
What is the libertarian perspective on government and military?
Why does the speaker feel the need to be sharp when acting on screen?
What is Edward?
What is the question in the space of all possible intelligences?
What is the author discussing in this passage?
What does the speaker credit for their success?
What is the topic of discussion in the text?
What is the main problem the speaker is facing?
What was Dick Feynman's opinion on quantum mechanics?
What is the author disappointed in regarding expertise in science?
What is the speaker's opinion on the Holocaust?
What is an organoid and can it mimic different regions of the brain?
What are the two deeply human aspects mentioned in the text?
What are the two fields that the speaker particularly focuses on?
What is the speaker's opinion on Bitcoin?
What is the author's point about our dependence on supply chains?
What is the author discussing in this text?
What is the topic of discussion in this text?
What is the purpose of the author's writing style in 'just my stuff'?
What have they been talking about in regards to robots?
What is the town square test and who proposed it?
What is the fallacy that the speaker talks about in the given text?
What experimental test did the speaker propose based on the professor's statement?
What is the theme of exponential growth mentioned in the text?
What is the author discussing in this passage?
What was the author's initial area of study?
What is the idea behind the Trojan horse allegory mentioned in the text?
What is the ultimate AI problem discussed in the text?
What is the speaker doing while looking at the monitor?
What does the author love?
What is the speaker's reason for not going to Burning Man?
What is the author's point of view on the idea of unification?
What are the two main problems that need to be solved in robotics?
What is the goal of the process mentioned in the text?
What does the speaker say about the issues being discussed?
What does the speaker like doing?
Why shouldn't you go to bed any earlier?
What is the human body compared to in the text?
What is the comparison made between the trailer drivers and Uber drivers?
What is the game that the speaker is referring to?
What is the benefit of a process where it's good for the individual and good for the whole?
What is the speaker's opinion on the meaning of life?
What did the author fear the most about COVID?
What is the difference between humans and non-human animals?
What is the author's opinion on the potential for exponential growth in technology?
What is the author discussing in this passage?
What was the author's initial idea about programming languages?
What are some possible explanations for why we haven't heard from extraterrestrial life?
What is the 20 minute challenge?
What is the author's opinion on the idea that machines can't have experience?
What is the topic of the text?
What is the speaker discussing in regards to numbers?
What was the goal of the research mentioned in the text?
What is the speaker's view of Russia?
What is the benefit of using the code LEX PODCAST when downloading Cash App?
Who did the speaker text before going on Tucker's show?
What does the speaker urge people not to get into?
What is the most compelling question to the speaker?
What is the conversation the speaker had with Dan Carlin?
What organization will receive a donation if you use the code LEXPODCAST on Cash App?
What is the innate desire that humans have according to the text?
What was the name of the first robot the speaker worked with?
What is the speaker's opinion on the size of the list?
What is the ethical question posed by the author?
What does the author love about fighting?
Who did the speaker and their partner go to for therapy?
What does the author believe about the idea that technology is values agnostic?
What is the beauty of music according to the speaker?
What advice did the speaker give to students?
What is the scientist's goal in sharing information about the science of sleep?
What is the trend that the speaker sees when looking back at history?
What is the speaker's opinion on the argument being discussed?
What was the name of the popular forum that the speaker used to ask questions on?
What is the topic of discussion in the given text?
What technology does the speaker rely on for intuition?
What was the speaker's profession and where did they work?
What is the speaker's background that gives them an advantage as an ethnographer?
What is the problem with the Olympics according to the text?
What is the speaker excited about in the future?
What topics are currently in the realm of philosophy?
What is the big discovery of the principle mentioned in the text?
What is the topic of the panel discussion that the speaker saw on YouTube?
What is the best way to learn how to do something?
What book was the speaker listening to while running?
What is the speaker's opinion on building an AI that can detect nuanced language in different languages?
What is the anonymous discussion feed for Yale campus?
What is the speaker's opinion on the dark aspects of human nature?
What are the names of the two startups mentioned in the text?
What does the speaker do to expand their brain's capacity to predict more effectively?
What is the book about that is being discussed?
What is the topic of discussion in the given text?
What game did the speaker hate playing in high school?
What does the author think about the use of social media?
What is the author discussing in this text?
What is radar jamming?
What is the author's perspective on human history?
What is the speaker's opinion on human level intelligence?
What is the speaker's concern about machine learning?
What types of things can be found on Wikipedia according to the text?
What was the name of the popular forum that the speaker used to ask questions on?
What is the significance of the Winter War mentioned in the text?
What is the author trying to say about our experiences?
What is the author's opinion on the potential of Librex?
What is the 'lockdown harm' referred to in the text?
What is the open discussion that the author suggests we are still having?
What is the advantage of technology according to the text?
What is Dan Gable known for?
What did the researchers discover during phase two of MAPS?
What is the topic of discussion in the given text?
What is the speaker's opinion on alien technology?
What is the author's opinion on traveling faster than the speed of light?
What is the topic of discussion in the given text?
What is the benefit of using the code LEXPODCAST when downloading Cash App?
What is the difference between when the speaker was talking to people after Deep Work and now, five years later?
What does the author mean by 'skin in the game'?
What is the speaker's initial fascination with math and physics?
What advice would George give to a young person about life?
According to the panpsychist, what is all there is?
What is the focus of volume one of the book?
What is the suggestion made by the speaker to solve the email problem?
What is the speaker's opinion about the potential for their product to be useful?
What are some possible explanations for why we haven't heard a big, loud signal from other intelligent life forms?
What is the speaker referring to as an 'intractable problem'?
What was the important thing to take into account when considering the size of the armies?
What is the speaker's opinion on the importance of understanding a person's thinking and actions?
What is the speaker's question regarding understanding something?
What is the author's opinion on the ability of neural networks?
What is the problem with the COVID virus?
What is the speaker's profession or occupation?
What are the names of the sponsors mentioned in the conversation?
What is the purpose of science according to the speaker?
What is one thing that the speaker mentions is missing in Alexa?
What was the author studying and why?
What was one of the really stressful parts of the situation?
What is the speaker's opinion on Bitcoin as a mechanism for resisting authoritarianism?
What is the speaker's fundamental belief about people?
What is the example given in the text to explain a distributed algorithm?
What kind of problems should you pick according to the speaker?
What is the open scientific problem that the speaker is referring to?
What is the author's opinion on the unexpected result?
What was the speaker's reaction to the object they saw?
What is ultimately ending COVID?
What is the benefit of using ExpressVPN?
What is the author's opinion on integrating compound semiconductors with silicon?
What is the speaker going to talk about?
What is the concept of complex exponentiation trying to capture?
What was the reason for the speaker's need for medication?
What does the author wonder about physicists and their ability to understand a phenomenon?
What is the author's opinion on the trend of history?
What is the difference between closed end problems and reading?
What are the two things involved in creating a hypergraph?
